
1.	Avoid single use advent calendars which are thrown away after they are used.  Why not make a more eco- calendar using old coloured envelopes into which to pop your own goodies or make numbered pockets out of old vintage fabrics and hang these up around the home.
2.	Visit www.lovefoodhatewaste.com for a range of seasonal recipes, helping you make the most of your food leftovers.
3.	Plenty of Christmas gadgets and toys rely on batteries so why not invest in rechargeable ones?  While these can cost a little more than single-life batteries they will repay you time and time again and last for many years to come.
4.	Help reduce waste by sending e-cards instead of more traditional Christmas cards.  If you are not sure what to buy why not consider giving a gift card to be used for a day out or experience instead of giving something which may just be consigned to a back of cupboard?
5.	Opt for wrapping paper which can be easily recycled.  Wrap which is foiled or glittered isn’t recyclable so chose paper-only wrap - or why not consider reusable packaging such as gift bags?
6.	Don’t bin your broken fairy lights.  The Waste and Resources Action Programme (WRAP) estimates that 500 tonnes of lights are thrown each year.  Take them to your local Household Recycling Centre and put in the bank for small electrical items.
7.	Cards covered with foil, glitter and ribbons can’t be recycled so keep these to make gift tags for your presents.
8.	Check you have foil, plastic film and Tupperware boxes at the ready to store any leftover foods during the party season.  Hang on to empty margarine tubs too as these will work just as well!  
9.	Many of us will be given a new electrical device this Christmas.  However, sending old electricals to landfill can cause environmental problems as they can contain hazardous substances such as lead and arsenic.  Make sure to take old items to the Household Recycling Centre and place in the bank for small electricals if they cannot be repaired.
10.	Furoshiki is the Japanese art of gift-wrapping using fabric which can be used again and again.  Need some inspiration?  Visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bn6zdyCAwJs.
11.	It’s easy to get carried away with the Christmas food shop.  Make sure you write a list first and buy only the food you need to help reduce waste.
12.	Collect any interesting and unusual glass jars.  Use them for jams and chutneys to give as homemade gifts or why not decorate them and use as tea light holders?  A homemade gift is a great way to reduce excessive packaging too.
13.	The Carbon Trust calculates that an artificial tree would need to be used for 10 years to have a lower carbon impact than buying a real tree.  The best option is to purchase a potted living tree which can be used year after year.
14.	Make sure you have enough kerbside recycling containers.  Contact your local council if you need to request more.  Maximise the space in your box or bin by squash the recycling as much as possible – particularly if you have to wait a little longer than normal for your next recycling collection.
15.	Get crafty and reuse!  Paint yoghurt pots and dress them with glitter and bits of fabric to make your very own tree decorations; use strips of coloured paper from old magazines to make an array of interesting paper chains; or create your own festive bunting by recycling old fabrics.
16.	Remember to check the use-by dates regularly on food items in your fridge and if you are not going to use them in time, freeze the food for later.  If the food cannot be frozen why not ask if a neighbour if they can make use of it?
17.	Use compostable items to make your own decorations.  Dried oranges and popcorn can look very effective threaded on cotton to make pretty decorations that can be composted after.  Pinecones and homemade gingerbread can also look great hung on the tree.
18.	Check with your local council about recycling collections over Christmas and the New Year as these often change.  Remember to recycle your Christmas tree too once the festivities are over.  
19.	Many of us will receive a new item of clothing at Christmas.  Make sure you recycle any garments you no longer need at your local recycling banks or by using your kerbside service (if available).  If clothing is still of good quality donate it to your local charity shop and support a worthwhile cause.
20.	Remember to recycle your foil.  Recycling just six mince pie foil cases saves enough energy to watch an hour of your favourite Christmas movie.  Find out more about aluminium recycling at www.alupro.org.uk. 
21.	Keep an eye on your energy usage….don’t leave televisions on stand by and turn off your tree lights when you go to bed.
22.	Think ahead if catering from large groups of people.  Avoid buying disposable cups and plates made from plastic.  Instead set a challenge for your guests to bring their own and give a prize for the best!
23.	Remember Gloucestershire County Council’s Household Recycling Centres are open every day (9.00am to 6.15pm) except for Christmas Day and New Year’s Day and accept a wide range of items for recycling.
24.	Christmas crackers are often decorated with ribbons, organza and other trimmings.  Save these to use on your own homemade decorations next year.
25.	Finally, at the end of what is often a hectic but immensely enjoyable day, take a moment to think about making your very own ‘green’ New Year’s resolution……

Wishing you all a very, happy Christmas
